An epidural steroid injection
delivers medicine into the epidural space
that surrounds the spinal cord.
To help alleviate pain caused by irritated nerves.
The spine is made up of bones called vertebrae.
Between each vertebra is a fibrous disk
with a jell-like center.
This disk can rupture or bulge,
causing inflammation or pressure on the spinal nerves.
Resulting in pain, tingling or numbness.
An epidural steroid injection, or ESI,
may be recommended to relieve pain caused by inflammation.
The medication, a corticosteroid,
is injected in the epidural space
between the bony arch of the vertebra
and the dura, the thick covering of the spinal cord.
The injection may include
local anesthetic and/or saline
along with the corticosteroid medication
to give immediate pain relief
and flush the area of inflammatory agents.
The corticosteroid works to relieve pain
by reducing the inflammation and swelling
around the spinal nerve roots.
Corticosteroids enter cells and bind
to receptors in the cytoplasm.
The combination of corticosteroid and receptor
enters the cell nucleus, where it works to
control the production of proteins.
Including enzymes that cause inflammation.
By blocking the production of those enzymes
inflammation and swelling in the area around
the herniated disk
and the pain associated with it,
may be reduced.
Sometimes there are multiple areas of
potential nerve compression
or potential sources of pain,
and the injections are often used as
diagnostic tests to find the right source of pain.
If you inject the right spot
and the pain is reduced,
then it must be the source of the pain.
Thus, it is important to keep a diary of the
pain relief after the injection.
As with all medical procedures,
there are potential risks.
Potential risks of an epidural steroid injection include:
Infection,
Dural puncture,
Bleeding,
Nerve damage.
Certain medicines may need to be stopped
prior to your procedure.
Talk with your doctor about any medicines you are taking.
For 3 days before your procedure
please stop all nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, NSAIDs.
For 7 days before your procedure,
please stop aspirin, or any medicine containing aspirin,
any herbal medicine,
or any over the counter medicines.
Please speak to your doctor before
setting up your procedure,
if you are taking any blood thinning medicine.
Please call the spine clinic staff
the week before your procedure if you
have allergies to or problems with:
Iodine,
contrast dye,
steroids,
numbing medicines,
latex,
have been feeling sick,
or have had an infection of any kind,
or have been placed on antibiotics
within the month before your procedure,
have had 3 or more steroid injections
within the 12 months before your procedure,
are pregnant or could likely be pregnant.
It is not required that you have
someone to drive you home,
but it is a good idea.
You may have temporary arm or leg numbness
for up to 5 hours after your procedure.
If you have diabetes,
please check your fasting blood sugar
on the day of your visit, before you come.
After your procedure,
check your fasting blood sugar
4 times a day
for the next 3 days.
The medicine given to you during your procedure
may raise your blood sugar levels.
please check in 15 minutes
before your scheduled visit time.